CLDR-17192 kbd: v45 Normalization docs (#3445)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/ldml/tr35-keyboards.md

Markers remain in the same normalization-safe segment during normalization. Consider:

**Example 3**

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\u{0300}a\m{marker2}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

There are two normalization-safe segments here:

1. `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}`
2. `a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}`

Normalization (and marker rearranging) effectively occurs within each segment.  While `\m{marker1}` is 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`, it is glued within the first segment and has no effect on the second segment.

### Normalization and Character Classes

If pre-composed (non-NFD) characters are used in [character classes](#regex-like-syntax), such as `[á-é]` or `[\u{00e1}-\u{00e9}]`, these may not match as keyboard authors expect, as the U+00E1 character will not occur in NFD form.

The above could be written instead as a  `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)`, or as a set variable `<set id="Ex" value="á â ã ä å æ ç è é"/>` and matched as `$[Ex]`.

> Implementations should warn users if possible when character classes include non-NFD characters

Reviewer: This still needs some work. You don't want an implementation warning **end users** when a keyboard uses bad characters. In the whole spec, scan for the term "user", and make sure that it is clear that it means "parsers of keyboard data". And given that case, the warning needs to be upgraded
```suggestion
Parsing of keyboard data must emit an error when character classes include non-NFD characters.
```

Author: it's Keyboard Authors that should be warned. Will update.

Reviewer 2: As long as we don't actually try to preprocess the character class into another form such as a set (which was an earlier design discussion), and just keep it as a character class, it's not harmful to have a character class that includes NFC chars -- they just won't be matched.

The thinking we are currently going with is:

1. warn if the keyboard author directly references a NFC char, e.g. `[á-é]`, because that is likely unintentional -- that example would only match `æ` or `ç`, as the others in the range are vowels composed with diacritics.
2. hint if the keyboard author indirectly references NFC chars, e.g. `[\u{0020}-\u{01FF}]` because this is likely about excluding a whole script or range, and the fact that some NFC chars appear in that range won't affect the result.

In our ref implementation, the hint can be suppressed, and the warning can be escalated to an error, per the keyboard author's preference.

Author: ^please take a look at the update

See [Element special](tr35.md#special) in Part 1.

## Normalization

Normalization will not typically be the responsibility of the keyboard author, rather this will be managed by the keyboard implementation.
The keyboard implementation will apply normalization as appropriate when matching transform rules and `<display>` value matching.

> Output from the keyboard, following application of all transform rules, will be normalized to implementation- or application-requested form.

Reviewer 3: (also point 4. below) How does application request normalization form? This seems to be out of scope for the spec, and out of scope for input method, if the application needs NFD, it should perform NFD itself.

Author: That's up to the implementation.

The idea here is that keyboard implementation could be a 'platform' vs the end 'application' running on top of that platform.

An implementation might always want to output in NFC, that might be a common situation.

Or, perhaps applications on top of that implementation can request NFC or NFD.

Author: @macchiati also had pointed out that we should define the term "implementation" more specifically. I will do the same for "application".

Author: What do you think of this:

```suggestion
Output from the keyboard, following application of all transform rules, will be normalized to the appropriate form for the keyboard implementation.
```

Reviewer 3: This looks good.

> The attribute value `normalization="disabled"` can be used to indicate that no automatic normalization is to be applied in input, matching, or output.  Using this setting should be done with caution. See [`<settings>`](#element-settings).
> 
> Keyboard source files may be in any normalization format, because they are processed in NFD for purposes of matching. However, authors should be aware of areas where normalization affects keyboard operation.

Reviewer 2: These two paragraphs do read a little like they contradict each other.

```suggestion
The attribute value `normalization="disabled"` can be used to indicate that no automatic normalization is to be applied in input, matching, or output. Using this setting should be done with caution:

* When this attribute value is used, all matching and output uses only the exact codepoints provided by the keyboard author.
* Input context from the application may not be normalized, which means that the keyboard author should consider all possible combinations, including NFC, NFD, and mixed normalization in `<transform from=` attributes.
* See [`<settings>`](#element-settings) for further details.

The remainder of this section only applies when `normalization="disabled"` is not used.

Keyboard source files may be in any normalization format, because they are processed in NFD for purposes of matching. However, authors should be aware of areas where normalization affects keyboard operation.
```

There are four stages where normalization occurs. These are briefly outlined here, and then detailed below.

1. **From the keyboard source `.xml`**

    Example: `<key output=`, and `<transform from= to=` attribute contents
    - From any form to NFD: full normalization (decompose+reorder)
    - Markers must be processed
    - Regex rules must be handled carefully

2. **From the input context**

    Input context must be normalized for purposes of matching.

>     Example: Input context might contain U+00E8 (`è`).  User clicks the cursor after the character. User types `<key ... output="\u{0300}"/>`.
>     The implementation must normalize this to `e\u{0320}\u{0300}` ( è̠  ) before matching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Example: Input context might contain U+00E8 (`è`).  User clicks the cursor after the character. User types `<key ... output="\u{0320}"/>`.
    The implementation must normalize this to `e\u{0320}\u{0300}` (`è̠`) before matching.
```

### Normalization and Transform Matching

Regardless of the normalization form in the keyboard source file or in the edit buffer context, transform matching will be performed using **NFD**. For example, all of the following transforms will match the input strings è̠, whether the input is U+00E8 U+0320, U+0065 U+0320 U+0300, or U+0065 U+0300 U+0320.

```xml
<transform from="e\u{0320}\u{0300}" /> <!-- NFD -->
<transform from="\u{00E8}\u{0320}"  /> <!-- NFC: è + U+0320 -->
<transform from="e\u{0300}\u{0320}" /> <!-- Unnormalized -->
```

### Normalization and Markers

A special issue occurs when markers are involved.
[Markers](#markers) are not text, and so not themselves modified or reordered by the Unicode Normalization Algorithm.
Existing Normalization APIs typically operate on plain text, and so those APIs can not be used with content containing markers.

However, the markers must be retained and processed by keyboard implementations in a manner which will be both consistent across implementations and predictable to keyboard authors.

> Inconsistencies would result in different user experiences- specifically, different or incorrect text output- on some implementations and not another.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inconsistencies would result in different user experiences -- specifically, different or incorrect text output -- on some implementations and not another.
```

3. At the end of text,
    1. Add an element with `glue=END` and `divider?=true` to the end of _e_
    2. For every marker _m_ in _pending_:
        1. Add an element with `glue=END` and `marker=m` and `divider? = false` to the end of _e_

The string _s_ is now plain text and can be processed by the next phase.

The array _e_ will be used in Phase 3.

#### Phase 2: Plain Text Processing

See [UAX #15](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Description_Norm) for an overview of the process.  An existing Unicode-compliant API can be used here.

#### Phase 3: Adding Markers

1. Initialize an empty output string _o_
2. Loop through the elements _p_ of the array _e_ from end to beginning (backwards)
    1. If _p_.glue isn't `END`:
        1. break out of the loop
    2. If _p_.divider? == false:
        1. Prepend marker _p_.marker to the output string _o_
    3. Set _p_.processed?=true (so we don't process this again)
2. Loop through each codepoint _i_ ( in the plain text input string ) from end to beginning (backwards)
    1. Prepend _i_ to output _o_
    2. Loop through the elements _p_ of the array _e_ from end to beginning (backwards)

>         1. If _p_.processed? == true:

Author: I wrote it to avoid mutating the _e_ array during processing, other than contracting the length of the array.  This avoids having to copy/move all other items during processing.

            1. Continue the inner loop  (was already processed)
        2. If _p_.glue isn't _i_
            1. Continue the inner loop  (wrong glue, not applicable)
        3. If _p_.divider? == true:
            1. Break out of the inner loop  (reached end of this 'glue' char)

>         4. Prepend marer _p_.marker to the output string _o_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        4. Prepend marker _p_.marker to the output string _o_
```

        5. Set _p_.processed?=true (so we don't process this again)
3. _o_ is now the output string including markers.

#### Example Normalization with Markers

**Example 1**

Consider this example, without markers:

- `e\u{0300}\u{0320}` (input)
- `e\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

The combining marks are reordered.

**Example 2**

If we add markers:

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker}\u{0320}` (input)
- `e\m{marker}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

Note that the marker is 'glued' to the _following_ character. In the above example, `\m{marker}` was 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`.

**Example 2**

A second example:

- `e\m{marker0}\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}\m{marker2}` (input)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\m{marker0}\u{0300}\m{marker2}` (NFD)

Here `\m{marker2}` is 'glued' to the end of the string. However, if additional text is added such as by a subsequent keystroke (which may add an additional combining character, for example), this marker may be 'glued' to that following text.

> Markers remain in the same normalization-safe segment during normalization. Consider:

Reviewer 3: How is this covered in the algorithm above? It seems to operate on the whole input/output string.

Author: it operates on the entire form, however, it will not move markers between segments.

**Example 3**

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\u{0300}a\m{marker2}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

There are two normalization-safe segments here:

1. `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}`
2. `a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}`

Normalization (and marker rearranging) effectively occurs within each segment.  While `\m{marker1}` is 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`, it is glued within the first segment and has no effect on the second segment.

### Normalization and Character Classes

> If pre-composed (non-NFD) characters are used in [character classes](#regex-like-syntax), such as `[á-é]`, these may not match as keyboard authors expect, as the U+00E1 character will not occur in NFD form. Thus this may be masking serious errors in the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If pre-composed (non-NFD) characters are used in [character classes](#regex-like-syntax), such as `[á-é]`, these may not match as keyboard authors expect, as the U+00E1 character (á) will not occur in NFD form. Thus this may be masking serious errors in the data.
```

By default, tools that process the keyboard data should raise an error when character classes include non-NFD characters.

> The above should be written instead as a regex `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)`, or as a set variable `<set id="Example" value="á â ã ä å æ ç è é"/>` and matched as `$[Example]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above should be written instead as a regex `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)`. Alternative it could be written as a set variable `<set id="Example" value="á â ã ä å æ ç è é"/>` and matched as `$[Example]`.
```

Slightly confusing unless we split the solutions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The above should be written instead as a regex `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)`. Alternatively, it could be written as a set variable `<set id="Example" value="á â ã ä å æ ç è é"/>` and matched as `$[Example]`.
```

Reviewer 2: thx for fixing my fix @jahorton 🤣

Author: thanks!

There is another case where there is no explicit mention of a non-NFD character, but the character class could include non-NFD characters, such as the range `[\u{0020}-\u{01FF}]`. For these, the tools should raise a warning by default.

### Normalization and Reorders

[`reorder`](#element-reorder) elements operate on NFD codepoints.

### Normalization and Output

On output, text will be normalized into the form requested by that implementation, or possibly specifically requested by a particular application.
For example, many platforms may request NFC as the output format. In such a case, all text emitted via the keyboard will be transformed into NFC.

> Existing text in a document will only have normalization applied within a single normalization-safe segment from the caret.  Output will not contain any markers, thus any normalization is unaffected by any markers embedded within the segment.

Reviewer 2: I'm seeing inconsistent line endings on paragraphs. Will you be wrapping at n columns or all on one line? 

(My preference is to wrap even though that introduces more noise in diffs, because it is easier to read in naive text editors)

Author: I'm trying not to mutate them for lines that I'm not editing. 

We have a proposal somewhere to put each sentence on its own line, so diffs are clearer.

I could word wrap it late in the release cycle perhaps. Maybe even a release task.

See [Element special](tr35.md#special) in Part 1.

## Normalization

> Normalization will not typically be the responsibility of the keyboard author, rather this will be managed by the keyboard implementation.

Reviewer: This first sentence will not mean anything to lots of people. You need to explain at least a bit about it before launching into why I (the keyboard author) don't need to do it.

Reviewer: A line or two, plus indication that good i18n libraries (such as ICU) provide functions to perform the normalization.

The keyboard implementation will apply normalization as appropriate when matching transform rules and `<display>` value matching.

> Output from the keyboard, following application of all transform rules, will be normalized to the appropriate form for the keyboard implementation.

Reviewer: 'for' ? or 'by' ?

Author: _Which_ form is up to that implementation. But, "appropriate" conveys that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Output from the keyboard, following application of all transform rules, will be normalized to the appropriate form by the keyboard implementation.
```

> The attribute value `normalization="disabled"` can be used to indicate that no automatic normalization is to be applied in input, matching, or output. Using this setting should be done with caution:

Reviewer: way too early. If this is unusual, save it until the end.

```xml
<transform from="e\u{0320}\u{0300}" /> <!-- NFD -->
<transform from="\u{00E8}\u{0320}"  /> <!-- NFC: è + U+0320 -->
<transform from="e\u{0300}\u{0320}" /> <!-- Unnormalized -->
```

### Normalization and Markers

A special issue occurs when markers are involved.
[Markers](#markers) are not text, and so not themselves modified or reordered by the Unicode Normalization Algorithm.
Existing Normalization APIs typically operate on plain text, and so those APIs can not be used with content containing markers.

However, the markers must be retained and processed by keyboard implementations in a manner which will be both consistent across implementations and predictable to keyboard authors.
Inconsistencies would result in different user experiences -- specifically, different or incorrect text output -- on some implementations and not another.
Unpredictability would make it challenging for the keyboard author to create a keyboard with expected behavior.

> This section gives an algorithm for implementing normalization on a text stream including markers.

Reviewer: You should get @markusicu to review this algorithm for correctness.

Author: requested. good idea.

See [Element special](tr35.md#special) in Part 1.

## Normalization

> Unicode Normalization, as described in [The Unicode Standard](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr41/#Unicode/), is a process by which Unicode text is processed to eliminate unwanted distinctions.

Reviewer 5: Is this meant to be a link to UNICODE NORMALIZATION FORMS ?
```suggestion
Unicode Normalization, as described in [The Unicode Standard](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Unicode/), is a process by which Unicode text is processed to eliminate unwanted distinctions.
```

Author: No, it's a link to Unicode itself.

This section discusses how conformant keyboards are affected by normalization, and the impact of normalization on keyboard authors and keyboard implmentations.

> Keyboard implementation will usually apply normalization as appropriate when matching transform rules and `<display>` value matching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keyboard implementations will usually apply normalization as appropriate when matching transform rules and `<display>` value matching.
```

Output from the keyboard, following application of all transform rules, will be normalized to the appropriate form by the keyboard implementation.

> Note: There are many existing software libraries which perform Unicode Normalization, including [ICU](https://icu.unicode.org), [ICU4X](https://icu4x.unicode.org), and JavaScript's [String.prototype.normalize()](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/normalize).

Keyboard authors will not typically need to perform normalization as part of the keyboard layout.  However, authors should be aware of areas where normalization affects keyboard operation so that they may achieve their desired results.

### Where Normalization Occurs

There are four stages where normalization occurs.

1. **From the keyboard source `.xml`**

>     Keyboard source .xml files may be in any normalization form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Keyboard source .xml files may be in any normalization form.
    However, in processing they are converted to NFD.
```

>     Example: `<key output=`, and `<transform from= to=` attribute contents

Reviewer: Bad formatting. The bullets being right under the example makes it seem like they apply just to that example.

Reviewer: I'm guessing you want the examples *after* the bullets (consistently)

Author: fixed

    - From any form to NFD: full normalization (decompose+reorder)

>     - Markers must be processed

Reviewer: This section is still a bit muddled.

Are you addressing keyboard implementers, and telling them what they must do, or are you addressing authors and telling them what they must do? Or both?

In either case "markers must be processed" doesn't make any sense without more information. 
- If for implementers, **how** are they supposed to process them? Refer to a place that describes what they need to do, or say something like " as described below".
- If for authors, what are they supposed to be doing with markers because of normalization?

Reviewer: I recomment that you structure this as:

Steps that keyboard implementations must do.

Implications for keyboard authors: how they need to structure their data so that it is correctly handled, given those implementation steps.

Reviewer: Then the opening statement that " However, authors should be aware of areas where normalization affects keyboard operation so that they may achieve their desired results." will make sense.

Author: > If for authors, what are they supposed to be doing...?

Authors need to understand what the implementers are doing.

Author: updated

>     - Regex rules must be handled carefully

Reviewer: Same for "must be handled carefully"; by whom? and how?

2. **From the input context**

>     Input context must be normalized for purposes of matching.

Reviewer: Globally check for missing articles. This should be "The input... " or "An input.."

Author: done

>     Example: Input context might contain U+00E8 (`è`).  User clicks the cursor after the character. User types `<key ... output="\u{0320}"/>`.

Reviewer: Same here: 
```suggestion
    Example: The input context contains U+00E8 (`è`).  The user clicks the cursor after the character, then types `<key ... output="\u{0320}"/>`.
```

Reviewer: Also, do you really mean that the user literally types the characters `<, k, e, y, , ., ..., /, >`?

Author: The user types a key producing U+0320, thanks, will reword.

### Normalization and Transform Matching

Regardless of the normalization form in the keyboard source file or in the edit buffer context, transform matching will be performed using **NFD**. For example, all of the following transforms will match the input strings è̠, whether the input is U+00E8 U+0320, U+0065 U+0320 U+0300, or U+0065 U+0300 U+0320.

```xml
<transform from="e\u{0320}\u{0300}" /> <!-- NFD -->
<transform from="\u{00E8}\u{0320}"  /> <!-- NFC: è + U+0320 -->
<transform from="e\u{0300}\u{0320}" /> <!-- Unnormalized -->
```

### Normalization and Markers

A special issue occurs when markers are involved.
[Markers](#markers) are not text, and so not themselves modified or reordered by the Unicode Normalization Algorithm.
Existing Normalization APIs typically operate on plain text, and so those APIs can not be used with content containing markers.

However, the markers must be retained and processed by keyboard implementations in a manner which will be both consistent across implementations and predictable to keyboard authors.

> Inconsistencies would result in different user experiences -- specifically, different or incorrect text output -- on some implementations and not another.

Reviewer: Minor: -- should be replaced by — throughout the document.

Author: thanks. I thought it was replaced by markdown but apparently not.

Unpredictability would make it challenging for the keyboard author to create a keyboard with expected behavior.

This section gives an algorithm for implementing normalization on a text stream including markers.

> _Note:_ The algorithm may be performed on a plain text stream which doesn't include markers, but implementations may opt to skip the removing/re-adding steps 1 and 3 if no markers are involved.

Reviewer: but ==> so ?

Reviewer: Or do you mean that 

```suggestion
_Note:_ When the algorithm is performed on a plain text stream that doesn't include markers, implementations may skip the removing/re-adding steps 1 and 3 because no markers are involved.
```

#### Rationale for 'gluing' markers

> It is recognized that the processing described here describes an extension to Unicode normalization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The processing described here describes an extension to Unicode normalization to account for the desired behavior of markers.
```

The algorithm described considers markers 'glued' (remaining with) the following character. If a context ends with a marker, that marker would be guaranteed to remain at the end after processing, consistently located with respect to the next keystroke to be input.

1. Keyboard authors can keep a marker together with a character of interest by emitting the marker just previous to that character.

For example, given a key `output="\m{marker}X"`, the marker will proceed `X` regardless of any normalization. (If `output="X\m{marker}"` were used, and `X` were to reorder with other characters, the marker would no longer be adjacent to the X.)

2. Markers which are at the end of input remain at the end of input during normalization.

For example, given input context which ends with a marker, such as `...ABCDX\m{marker}`, the marker will remain at the end of the input context regardless of any normalization.

The 'gluing' is only applicable during one particular processing step. It does not persist or affect further processing steps or future keystrokes.

#### Data Model: `Marker`

> For purposes of discussion, a `Marker` is an opaque data type which has one property, its ID. See [Markers](#markers) for a discussion of the marker ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For purposes of this algorithm, a `Marker` is an opaque data type which has one property, its ID. See [Markers](#markers) for a discussion of the marker ID.
```

#### Data Model: string

> For purposes of discussion in this section, a string is an array of elements, where each element is either a codepoint or a `Marker`. For example, a [`key`](#element-key) in the XML such as `<key id="sha" output="𐓯\m{mymarker}x" />` would produce a string with three elements:

Reviewer: ditto

- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\m{marker0}\u{0300}\m{marker2}` (NFD)

Here `\m{marker2}` is 'glued' to the end of the string. However, if additional text is added such as by a subsequent keystroke (which may add an additional combining character, for example), this marker may be 'glued' to that following text.

Markers remain in the same normalization-safe segment during normalization. Consider:

**Example 3**

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\u{0300}a\m{marker2}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

There are two normalization-safe segments here:

1. `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}`
2. `a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}`

Normalization (and marker rearranging) effectively occurs within each segment.  While `\m{marker1}` is 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`, it is glued within the first segment and has no effect on the second segment.

### Normalization and Character Classes

If pre-composed (non-NFD) characters are used in [character classes](#regex-like-syntax), such as `[á-é]`, these may not match as keyboard authors expect, as the U+00E1 character (á) will not occur in NFD form. Thus this may be masking serious errors in the data.

> By default, tools that process the keyboard data should raise an error when character classes include non-NFD characters.

Reviewer: Needs to be stronger

```suggestion
Tools that process keyboard data must reject the data when character classes include non-NFD characters.
```

The above should be written instead as a regex `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)`. Alternatively, it could be written as a set variable `<set id="Example" value="á â ã ä å æ ç è é"/>` and matched as `$[Example]`.

There is another case where there is no explicit mention of a non-NFD character, but the character class could include non-NFD characters, such as the range `[\u{0020}-\u{01FF}]`. For these, the tools should raise a warning by default.

### Normalization and Reorders

[`reorder`](#element-reorder) elements operate on NFD codepoints.

### Normalization and Output

> On output, text will be normalized into the form requested by that implementation, or possibly specifically requested by a particular application.

Reviewer: muddy sentence

If the "implementation" and "application" disagree, what happens?

I'm guessing you mean something like the following.

```suggestion
On output, text will be normalized into a specified normalization form. That form will typically be NFC, but an implementation may allow a calling application to override the choice of normalization form.
```

Author: That works.

For example, many platforms may request NFC as the output format. In such a case, all text emitted via the keyboard will be transformed into NFC.

> Existing text in a document will only have normalization applied within a single normalization-safe segment from the caret.  Output will not contain any markers, thus any normalization is unaffected by any markers embedded within the segment.

Reviewer: Again, missing article: "The output". 

I'm not marking all of these, so please pass through the document to catch them.

For example, the sequence `e\m{marker}\u{300}` would be output in NFC as `è`. The marker is removed and has no effect on output.

> ### Normalization-safe Segments

Reviewer: Define this **before** using it, not after.

For purposes of the above discussion, "normalization-safe segments" are defined as a string of codepoints which are

1. already in [NFD](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Norm_Forms), and
2. begin with a character with [Canonical Combining Class](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr44/#Canonical_Combining_Class_Values) of `0`.

See [UAX #15 Section 9.1: Stable Code Points](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Stable_Code_Points) for related discussion.
Text under consideration can be segmented by locating such characters.

### Disabling Normalization

> The attribute value `normalization="disabled"` can be used to indicate that no automatic normalization is to be applied in input, matching, or output. Using this setting should be done with caution:

Reviewer: Why are we supplying this option, when it is so dangerous

Author: We're supplying this option, because some text loses data during NFC.  One example given in discussion was Hebrew cantillation marks.

Reviewer 2: From my perspective, this is an escape valve that allows a keyboard author to match behaviour in existing input methods which do not support normalization. For example, if you want to create a Vietnamese keyboard that matches other Vietnamese input methods that produce non-normalized output.

I guess this is partly recognition that we are uncertain that normalization is going to be desirable in all circumstances. It may be that it works out that no keyboards need this, in which case we deprecate in a future version. But it feels like a big call right now to say we will always normalize in all cases without any way out of it.

I'd say it's not actually dangerous -- it doesn't result in data loss -- but does potentially make a lot more work for the keyboard developer who has to consider input normalization themselves.  but no more than was previously the case with existing input methods.

We found that it was not hard to support this flag in the Keyman implementation, so cost shouldn't be a big issue.

Reviewer 2: Semi-related: a real life example from today of keyboard authors dealing with normalization: https://github.com/keymanapp/keyboards/pull/2564

Reviewer: Ok, that makes sense.

See [Element special](tr35.md#special) in Part 1.

## Normalization

Normalization will not typically be the responsibility of the keyboard author, rather this will be managed by the implementation.

> The implementation will apply normalization as appropriate when matching transform rules and `<display>` value matching.

Author: Implementation is the implementation of the keyboard specification.

> The implementation will apply normalization as appropriate when matching transform rules and `<display>` value matching.

Reviewer: change the terms to "keyboard implementation" for clarity. ("implementation" could also be the implementation that is *consuming* the results of the keyboard, for example.)

Output from the keyboard, following application of all transform rules, will be normalized to implementation- or application-requested form.

> The attribute value `normalization="disabled"` can be used to indicate that no automatic normalization happens in input, matching, or output.  Using this setting should be done with caution. See [`<settings>`](#element-settings).

Author: yes, thanks.

    However, marker reordering may be needed if transforms insert segments out of order.
    - Markers must be preserved.

4. **Before output to the platform/application**

    Text must be normalized into the output form requested by the platform or application.

    - For example, to NFC: full normalization (reorder+composition).
    - No markers are present in this text, they are removed prior to output but retained in the implementation's input context for subsequent keystrokes. See [markers](#markers).

### Normalization and Transform Matching

Regardless of the normalization form in the keyboard source file or in the edit buffer context, transform matching will be performed using **NFD**. For example, all of the following transforms will match the input strings è̠, whether the input is U+00E8 U+0320, U+0065 U+0320 U+0300, or U+0065 U+0300 U+0320.

```xml
<transform from="e\u{0320}\u{0300}" /> <!-- NFD -->
<transform from="\u{00E8}\u{0320}"  /> <!-- NFC: è + U+0320 -->
<transform from="e\u{0300}\u{0320}" /> <!-- Unnormalized -->
```

### Normalization and Markers

> A special issue occurs when markers are involved. Markers are not text, and so are themselves affected by the normalization algorithm.

Author: > if the normalization makes that DCBA, where does the marker go?

It becomes DC{marker}a

> How about BADC?

That would be {marker}BADC

The text below does explain that markers are glued to the following char.

> A special issue occurs when markers are involved. Markers are not text, and so are themselves affected by the normalization algorithm.

Reviewer: What I'm saying is that a clear algorithm has to be provided, NOT just comments on an example. Those comments are ok, but you need the step-by-step algorithm.

> A special issue occurs when markers are involved. Markers are not text, and so are themselves affected by the normalization algorithm.

Author: if at end of a segment, it remains at the end

XYZ{marker} =>  YXZ{marker}

> A special issue occurs when markers are involved. Markers are not text, and so are themselves affected by the normalization algorithm.

Reviewer 4: Also,

XYZ{marker} => ZXY{marker}

(Since the last character changing, yet the marker remaining in place at the end, is the part most in need of clarification)

#### Rationale for 'gluing' markers

It is recognized that the processing described here seems to be an innovation among Unicode normalization implementations.

This specification has markers 'glued' (remaining with) the following character so that if a context ends with a marker, that marker would be guaranteed to remain at the end after processing, consistently located with respect to the next keystroke to be input.  Alternatively, authors can keep a marker together with a character of interest by emitting the marker just previous to the character of interest, that is, `output="\m{marker}X"` instead of `output="X\m{marker}"`.

### Normalization and Character Classes

If pre-composed (non-NFD) characters are used in [character classes](#regex-like-syntax), such as `[á-é]` or `[\u{00e1}-\u{00e9}]`, these may not match as keyboard authors expect, as the U+00E1 character will not occur in NFD form.

The above could be written instead as a  `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)`, or as a set variable `<set id="Ex" value="á â ã ä å æ ç è é"/>` and matched as `$[Ex]`.

> Implementations may want to warn users when character classes include non-NFD characters.

Reviewer: Implementations 'want'?

```suggestion
Implementations should warn users if possible when character classes include non-NFD characters 
```

### Normalization and Reorders

[`reorder`](#element-reorder) elements operate on NFD codepoints.

The reorders do not themselves interact with markers, that is, markers may not be matched by a `reorder` element. However, if a character preceded by one or more markers is reordered due to a `reorder` element, those markers will also move with the characters as with the `transform` elements.

### Normalization and Output

On output, text will be normalized into the form requested by that implementation, or possibly specifically requested by a particular application.
For example, many platforms may request NFC as the output format. In such a case, all text emitted via the keyboard will be transformed into NFC.

> Existing text in a document will only have normalization applied within a single normalization-safe segment from the caret.  Output normalization to NFC, when appropriate, is unaffected by any markers embedded within the segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Existing text in a document will only have normalization applied within a single normalization-safe segment from the caret.  Output will not contain any markers, thus any normalization is unaffected by any markers embedded within the segment.
```

Text under consideration can be segmented by locating such characters.

### Pseudocode for Marker-safe Normalization

The following is an informative section with some example pseudocode for marker-safe normalization into NFD.

1. Markers are not text. This pseudocode assumes an implementation which is able to distinguish markers from plain text.

2. Some optimization notes are given, but the emphasis here is on a clear and correct implementation.

3. A distinction would need to be made between (A) markers in text, such as a keystroke emitting `\m{someMarker}` or a marker in input context, and (B) markers in transform match strings, such as `<transform from="\m{marker}">` or `<transform from="\m{.}">`.  An implementation could pass a parameter through the following code path distinguishing A and B, this distinction is not shown, for clarity.

Example use:

- `nfdMarkers('e\u{0300}' + Marker('marker1') + '\u{0320}a\u{0300}' + Marker('marker2') + '\u{0320}')`
- Returns: `'e' + Marker('marker1') + '\u{0320}\u{0300}a' + Marker('marker2') + '\u{0320}\u{0300}'`

```js
/**

>  * Normalize a string-with-markers into NFD.

Reviewer: General point. This pseudocode is at the wrong level. Too complicated for a simple example, but too simple for a real example.

Author: I am withdrawing the pseudocode for now.

 * @param input string with markers as out-of-band
 * @returns normalized output as a string with markers
 */

> export function nfdMarkers(input /* string with markers */) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export function nfdMarkers(input /* string with markers */) {
```

export function nfdMarkers(inputStringWithMarkers) {

    // to accumulate output text
    let output = "";
    // remove all markers
    let noMarkers = removeMarkers(input);
    // NFD the no-marker text.
    let noMarkersNfd = normalizeNFD(noMarkers);

    // Two quick checks.
    if (noMarkers === input) {
        // Heuristic: if there were no markers we can safely return noMarkersNFD
        return noMarkersNFD;
    } else if (noMarkersNFD === noMarkers) {
        // Heuristic: if normalization made no change, return the input string: already NFD
        return input;
    }

    let segmentStart = 0;
    let segmentEnd = 0;

    // look for normalization-safe segments
    // 'i' = iterate by codepoints
    do {
        const haveMarker = markerAt(i); // true if there is a marker here
        if (i === input.end) {
            segmentEnd = i; // end of input - end of segment
        } else if(hasNFDBoundaryBefore(i) && !have_marker) {
            segmentEnd = i; // end of segment

>             i++; // move past the NFD char

Reviewer: Using js conventions (and \`\`\`js)can make people think this is mostly js. But js (and java) will fail with i++ (here and elsewhere).

    // Note: parseMarkers() and removeMarkers() (not shown) could be the same function.
    // queue of markers found
    let lastMarkers: Marker[] = [];
    // return value
    let outputMap: MarkerEntry[] = [];

    // iterate string by codepoints
    for (i = s.begin; i< s.end;) {
        if (markerAt(i)) {
            // found a marker - add it to the list
            lastMarkers.add(markerAt(i));
            i += /* marker length */;
        } else {
            // From 'i' find the glue char for all markers found so far
            // (in order)
            // use first char of decomposed string
            const glue = normalizeNFD(i).codePointAt(0);
            for (m of lastMarkers) {
                outputMap.add({marker: m, glue: glue});
            }
            lastMarkers.clear();

            i++; // move to next codepoint
        }
    }

    // ran out of codepoints.
    // any remaining markers are EOT
    for (m of lastMarkers) {
        outputMap.add({marker: m, eot: true});
    } 
}

/**
 * re-add markers to input. Mutates markerMap.
 * @param input normalized string to re-add markers
 * @param markerMap list of glued markers. will be mutated
 */

> function addBackMarkers(input : string, map: MarkerEntry[]) : stringWithMarkers {

Reviewer: When would you want to re-add markers?

Author: It's called by one of the other functions.

Input source files may be in any normalization format, however, authors should be aware of two areas where normalization affects keyboard operation: that of transform matching, and that of output.

### Normalization and Transform Matching

Regardless of the normalization form in the keyboard source file or in the edit buffer context, transform matching will be performed using **NFD**. For example, all of the following transforms will match the input strings `è̠`, whether the input is U+00E8 U+0320, U+0065 U+0320 U+0300, or U+0065 U+0300 U+0320.

```xml
<transform from="e\u{0300}\u{0320}" /> <!-- Non-NFD but will match -->
<transform from="e\u{0320}\u{0300}" />
<transform from="\u{00E8}\u{0320}" /> <!-- è + U+0320 -->
```

#### Normalization and Markers

A special issue occurs when markers are involved. The markers may be reordered along with characters.

For example, the string `e\u{0300}\u{0320}` will be reordered in NFD to `e\u{0320}\u{0300}`.

If a marker is included, then `e\u{0300}\m{marker}\u{0320}` will be reordered to `e\m{marker}\u{0320}\u{0300}`. The principle is that the marker stays glued to the following character, in this case the U+0320.

> TODO
> 
> - If the marker is at the end of the string.

Reviewer 4: The natural implication would be that...

```suggestion
For a marker immediately before the current location of the text output caret, the marker stays glued to the caret's location until a new character is emitted, at which point the marker attaches to that new character.  It does not attach to any text located after the caret.
```

Of course, the question is if that is reasonable implementation-wise, rather than adding unwanted complications.  I imagine the latter is the case, given that this is a "TODO"?

Author: The normalization or transforms aren't dynamic, that is, processing happens after a keystroke.  So yes, the marker would be attached to the end of string *for purposes of normalization*.  When a new character is added to the context, that becomes the new attachment point.

See [Element special](tr35.md#special) in Part 1.

## Normalization

Normalization will not typically be the responsibility of the keyboard author, rather this will be managed by the implementation.
The implementation will apply normalization as appropriate when matching transform rules and `<display>` value matching.
Output from the keyboard, following application of all transform rules, will be normalized to implementation- or application-requested form.

The attribute value `normalization="disabled"` can be used to indicate that no automatic normalization happens.
Using this setting is not recommended. See [`<settings>`](#element-settings) for details.

Input source files may be in any normalization format, however, authors should be aware of two areas where normalization affects keyboard operation: that of transform matching, and that of output.

> Normalization can be applied within segments defined by Grapheme Cluster Boundaries as defined by [UAX #29](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr29/#Grapheme_Cluster_Boundaries). This segmentation is pertinent where markers are involved, see below.

Reviewer 3: What does this mean? That it _must_ be applied within UAX #29 boundaries? Or a warning that not whole string might be normalized at once? What if implementations employ different clustering rules?

Author: Perhaps this isn't helpful here and should move down to the discussion of markers. All it means is that the marker interaction doesn't occur across base char boundaries.

Reviewer 3: I agree it doesn't have much value here, and that it would be preferable if we had a simpler rule about the boundary, perhaps based on the character properties only, such as non-mark characters.

Reviewer 4: Based on what we said in the meeting:

> Normalization will only applied within normalization-safe boundary distance from the caret, within segments as defined by...

To make it clear that using an LDML keyboard doesn't instantly normalize the whole doc, a clarification we noted.

Author: yes, i will move that comment under the discussion of output. And let the marker discusion stand on its own.

### Normalization and Transform Matching

Regardless of the normalization form in the keyboard source file or in the edit buffer context, transform matching will be performed using **NFD**. For example, all of the following transforms will match the input strings `è̠`, whether the input is U+00E8 U+0320, U+0065 U+0320 U+0300, or U+0065 U+0300 U+0320.

```xml

> <transform from="e\u{0300}\u{0320}" /> <!-- Non-NFD but will match -->
> <transform from="e\u{0320}\u{0300}" />
> <transform from="\u{00E8}\u{0320}" /> <!-- è + U+0320 -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<transform from="e\u{0320}\u{0300}" /> <!-- NFD -->
<transform from="e\u{0300}\u{0320}" /> <!-- Non-NFD but will match -->
<transform from="\u{00E8}\u{0320}" /> <!-- è + U+0320 -->
```

Put the NFD transform first for clarity I think

Author: did this

```

#### Normalization and Markers

A special issue occurs when markers are involved. The markers may be reordered along with characters.

**Example 1**

Consider this example, without markers:

- `e\u{0300}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

If we add markers:

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\m{marker}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

> The principle is that the marker stays 'glued' to the following character, in this case the `\u{0320}`. If a marker occurs at the end of input or at the end of a segment (a grapheme cluster boundary), the marker is 'glued' to the end of that segment during the course of normalization. As another example:

Reviewer 4: > [...] or at the end of a segment (a grapheme cluster boundary), [...]

Does this mean that a marker can never be directly associated with what becomes the first character of a segment / grapheme cluster?

What if the following happens?  

User types (`\m{marker}` + `k`) to start a new cluster.
- with the marker and `k` output from a single keystroke

Does that `\m{marker}` now associate with the end of the prior segment?

----

Furthermore, suppose a language where vowels cluster with consonants, the latter of which should be first in the cluster.

User types: `e` (`\m{marker_1}` + `k`)
- with the marker and `k` output from a single keystroke
Normalization reorder: `\m{marker_1} k e`

Does _that_ `\m{marker}` now associate with the end of the prior segment?

----

Finally...

User types: (`\m{marker_2}` `e`) (`\m{marker_1}` + `k`)
- with the marker and `k` output from a single keystroke
Normalization reorder (if single-segment only): `\m{marker_1} k \m{marker_2} e`
- but... that `\m{marker_2}` was temporarily at the segment boundary before it got repositioned.

My interpretation of the spec as stated above, if a prior segment exists, would suggest...

(first keystroke)
`<prior segment>` `\m{marker_2}` `e`
- `{\m{marker_2}` becomes bound to prior segment

(second keystroke)
`<prior segment>` `\m{marker_2}` \m{marker_1} `k` `e`
- with `\m{marker_1}` additionally bound to the prior segment

----

Of course, my interpretation here could be wrong. 

Also, the logic that would be required to ensure that such an `e` (attaching, not base) doesn't attach to the prior segment before the `k` appears would likely be interesting, and I've kind of handwaved that here for the sake of this example.

Author: > > [...] or at the end of a segment (a grapheme cluster boundary), [...]
> 
> Does this mean that a marker can never be directly associated with what becomes the first character of a segment / grapheme cluster?

The 'association' here is just within a single step of processing. If something else is typed, then the text is re-analyzed.  The 'glue' does not persist.

> What if the following happens?
> 
> User types (`\m{marker}` + `k`) to start a new cluster.
> 
> * with the marker and `k` output from a single keystroke
> * `k` as a base character, validly starting a new cluster re: normalization.
> 
> Does that `\m{marker}` now associate with the end of the prior segment?

I think the answer is yes here.  Since `k` is a new cluster, the marker is at the 'end of the segment' and so will remain at the end, that is, that it won't be rearranged. In other words, the marker is in the same place regardless of prior chars, and regardless of whether the `k` was there or not. 

> Furthermore, suppose a language where vowels cluster with consonants, the latter of which should be first in the cluster.

Now I need to interrupt here, though- cluster *does not refer to any sort of tailored clusters*. It is not in any way language dependent.  So the following would never happen with `k` or `e`.   

"grapheme cluster" may be incorrect here, and should refer to normalization boundaries specifically.

> User types: `e` (`\m{marker_1}` + `k`)
> 
> * with the marker and `k` output from a single keystroke
> * `e` as an 'attaching' glyph, not a base glyph - same grapheme cluster
>   Normalization reorder: `\m{marker_1} k e`
> 
> Does _that_ `\m{marker_1}` now associate with the end of the prior segment?

If `e` and `k` were instead combining marks for example, it might reorder this way.  If "`k`" moves, then marker_1 moves.

> Finally...
> 
> User types: (`\m{marker_2}` `e`) (`\m{marker_1}` + `k`)
> 
> * with the marker and `k` output from a single keystroke
> * and marker + `e` output from a single keystroke
>   Normalization reorder (if single-segment only): `\m{marker_1} k \m{marker_2} e`
> * but... that `\m{marker_2}` was temporarily at the segment boundary before it got repositioned.

Segment boundaries don't persist.  If `k` would reorder before `e` (which it won't for NFD), then the markers would move as you noted.  

Also, the keystroke order isn't significant here.  Normalization is applied after the keystroke appends to the input text.  Whether one or 5 codepoints were added does not affect the normalization processing.  

> 
> My interpretation of the spec as stated above, if a prior segment exists, would suggest...
> 
> (first keystroke) `<prior segment>` `\m{marker_2}` `e`
> 
> * `{\m{marker_2}` becomes bound to prior segment
> 
> (second keystroke) `<prior segment>` `\m{marker_2}` `\m{marker_1}` `k` `e`
> 
> * with `\m{marker_1}` additionally bound to the prior segment
> 
> Of course, my interpretation here could be wrong.
> 
> Also, the logic that would be required to ensure that such an `e` (attaching, not base) doesn't attach to the prior segment before the `k` appears would likely be interesting, and I've kind of handwaved that here for the sake of this example.

I don't think this is needed since the boundary analysis is done after text is added and doesn't persist.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The principle is that the marker stays 'glued' to the following character, in this case the `\u{0320}`. If a marker occurs at the end of input or at the end of a segment (a grapheme cluster boundary), the marker is 'glued' to the end of that segment during the course of normalization for that keystroke. As another example:
```

As a normalization pass triggered later, by a followup keystroke, can reanchor the marker, it might be good to imply this occurs.  I certainly didn't infer it when I wrote the first comment in this chain.

Not sure if this is the _best_ wording, of course - feel free to workshop that.

Reviewer 2: temporarily glued? "for the current keystroke" is actually not quite correct, because multiple normalizations may occur during keystroke transform processing, and the gluing has to be done for each round of normalization; it's never stored.

Author: i think it's an improvement,thanks..

> The principle is that the marker stays 'glued' to the following character, in this case the `\u{0320}`. If a marker occurs at the end of input or at the end of a segment (a grapheme cluster boundary), the marker is 'glued' to the end of that segment during the course of normalization. As another example:

Reviewer 4: Noted during the meeting:  give rationale to attaching the marker to the following character.

Association of an "out of band" element interstitched with actual context appears to be novel and may be of use to others outside of LDML, so we should probably elaborate / motivate our decisions here more strongly.

Reviewer 4: Possible aspect to this:

- marker before character:  this is a special property of the character just typed
- character before marker:  no matter where the character ends up, activate a special state that affects the next keystroke

**Example 2**

- `e\m{marker0}\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}\m{marker2}` (original)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\m{marker0}\u{0300}\m{marker2}` (NFD)

Here `\m{marker2}` is 'glued' to the end of the segment. However, if additional text is added such as by a subsequent keystroke (which may add an additional combining character, for example), this marker may be 'glued' to that following text.

As noted above, normalization is applied within grapheme cluster boundaries. This is significant so that markers remain in the same grapheme cluster during normalization. Consider:

**Example 3**

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\u{0300}a\m{marker2}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

There are two grapheme clusters here:

1. `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}`
2. `a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}`

Normalization (and marker rearranging) occurs within each segment.  While `\m{marker1}` is 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`, it is glued within the first segment and has no effect on the second segment.

#### Normalization and Ranges

> If pre-composed characters are used in ranges, such as `[á-é]`, these will need to be expanded. The above range would expand to: `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)` (The expansion of U+00E1…U+00E9).  Implementations may want to warn users when ranges include non-NFD characters as they may be unexpected.

Reviewer 2: This needs to clarify that the expansion is NFD.

### Normalization and Output

On output, text will be normalized into the form requested by that implementation, or possibly specifically requested by a particular application.

> For example, many platforms may request NFC as the output format. In other words, all text emitted via the keyboard will be transformed into NFC.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, many platforms may request NFC as the output format. In such a case, all text emitted via the keyboard will be transformed into NFC.
```

**Example 2**

- `e\m{marker0}\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}\m{marker2}` (original)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\m{marker0}\u{0300}\m{marker2}` (NFD)

Here `\m{marker2}` is 'glued' to the end of the segment. However, if additional text is added such as by a subsequent keystroke (which may add an additional combining character, for example), this marker may be 'glued' to that following text.

Markers remain in the same normalization-safe segment during normalization. Consider:

**Example 3**

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\m{marker1}\u{0320}\u{0300}a\m{marker2}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

There are two normalization-safe segments here:

1. `e\u{0300}\m{marker1}\u{0320}`
2. `a\u{0300}\m{marker2}\u{0320}`

Normalization (and marker rearranging) occurs within each segment.  While `\m{marker1}` is 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`, it is glued within the first segment and has no effect on the second segment.

### Normalization and Character Classes

> If pre-composed (non-NFD) characters are used in [character classes](#regex-like-syntax), such as `[á-é]` or `[\u{00e1}-\u{00e9}]`, these may not match as keyboard authors expect, as the U+00E1 character will not occur in NFD form.

Reviewer: Note: we should be able to test these.

Author: Yes, we could issue a warning if a non-NFD char is used here, or if a range includes non-NFD chars.

### Normalization and Character Classes

If pre-composed (non-NFD) characters are used in [character classes](#regex-like-syntax), such as `[á-é]` or `[\u{00e1}-\u{00e9}]`, these may not match as keyboard authors expect, as the U+00E1 character will not occur in NFD form.

The above could be written instead as a  `(á|â|ã|ä|å|æ|ç|è|é)`, or as a set variable `<set id="Ex" value="á â ã ä å æ ç è é"/>` and matched as `$[Ex]`.

Implementations may want to warn users when character classes include non-NFD characters.

### Normalization and Output

On output, text will be normalized into the form requested by that implementation, or possibly specifically requested by a particular application.
For example, many platforms may request NFC as the output format. In such a case, all text emitted via the keyboard will be transformed into NFC.

> Existing text in a document will only have normalization applied within a single normalization-safe segment from the caret.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Existing text in a document will only have normalization applied within a single normalization-safe segment from the caret.  Output normalization to NFC, when appropriate, is unaffected by any markers embedded within the segment.
```

Just to be extra explicit about something that's currently just implied.

Reviewer: Unclear what is meant. If I have a<marker>\u0308 then the a + \u0308 converts to ä under NFC. In that circumstance is the marker to be removed or moved?

Reviewer 4: Output doesn't include markers.  

Just making clear that having the marker doesn't prevent character composition when there _are_ markers between the decomposed pieces within the LDML keyboard "black box".

Reviewer: I was thinking that, and so wondering about the language. Might be good to include that example for clarity after your sentence:

For example, U`marker`\u0308 is output as Ü.

Author: good idea. I'll add an example.

- `e\u{0300}\m{marker}\u{0320}` (original)
- `e\m{marker}\u{0320}\u{0300}` (NFD)

> During a processing step, such as appending a keystroke or one stage of applying a transform, the marker is 'glued' to the _following_ character. In the above example, `\m{marker}` was 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`. If a marker occured at the end of input or at the end of a normalization-safe segment, the marker is 'glued' to the end of that segment during that normalization step.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
During a processing step, such as appending a keystroke or one stage of applying a transform, the marker is 'glued' to the _following_ character. In the above example, `\m{marker}` was 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`. If a marker occurs at the end of input or at the end of a normalization-safe segment, the marker is 'glued' to the end of that segment during that normalization step.
```

Verb-tense agreement.

Normalization (and marker rearranging) occurs within each segment.  While `\m{marker1}` is 'glued' to the `\u{0320}`, it is glued within the first segment and has no effect on the second segment.

#### Rationale for 'gluing' markers

It is recognized that the processing described here seems to be an innovation among Unicode normalization implementations.

> This specification has markers 'glued' (remaining with) the following character so that if a context ends with a marker, that marker would be guaranteed to remain at the end after processing.  Authors can keep a marker together with a character of interest by emitting the marker just before the character of interest, that is, `output="\m{marker}X"` instead of `output="X\m{marker}"`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This specification has markers 'glued' (remaining with) the following character so that if a context ends with a marker, that marker would be guaranteed to remain at the end after processing, consistently located with respect to the next keystroke to be input.  Alternatively, authors can keep a marker together with a character of interest by emitting the marker just before the character of interest, that is, `output="\m{marker}X"` instead of `output="X\m{marker}"`.
```

To be a bit more explicit about the usefulness of end-of-context markers.

### Normalization-safe Segments

> For purposes of the above discussion, "normalization-safe segments" are defined as a string of codepoints which are
> (1) already in [NFD](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Norm_Forms), and
> (2) begin with a character with [Canonical Combining Class](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr44/#Canonical_Combining_Class_Values) of `0`.
> See [UAX #15 Section 9.1: Stable Code Points](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Stable_Code_Points) for related discussion.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For purposes of the above discussion, "normalization-safe segments" are defined as a string of codepoints which are

1. already in [NFD](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Norm_Forms), and
2. begin with a character with [Canonical Combining Class](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr44/#Canonical_Combining_Class_Values) of `0`.

See [UAX #15 Section 9.1: Stable Code Points](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Stable_Code_Points) for related discussion.
```

This is Markdown-based, so may as well make it a proper ordered list?

Text under consideration can be segmented by locating such characters.

### Pseudocode for Marker-safe Normalization

The following is an informative section with some example pseudocode for marker-safe normalization into NFD.

1. Markers are not text. This pseudocode assumes an implementation which is able to distinguish markers from plain text.

2. Some optimization notes are given, but the emphasis here is on a clear and correct implementation.

3. A distinction would need to be made between (A) markers in text, such as a keystroke emitting `\m{someMarker}` or a marker in input context, and (B) markers in transform match strings, such as `<transform from="\m{marker}">` or `<transform from="\m{.}">`.  An implementation could pass a parameter through the following code path distinguishing A and B, this distinction is not shown, for clarity.

Example use:

> - `nfdMarkers('e\u{0300}' + Marker('marker1') + '\u{0320}a\u{0300}' + Marker('marker2') + '\u{0320}')`
> - Returns: `'e' + Marker('marker1') + '\u{0320}\u{0300}a' + Marker('marker2') + '\u{0320}\u{0300}'`

Reviewer 4: It may be worth splitting the input and output strings to make the "normalization-safe segment" boundaries easier to parse.  Since you use `'\u{0300}'` and `'\u{0320}'` following both the `e` and the `a`, it's easy to confuse what's happening in the center part.

On first glance, it looked to me like `'\u{0320}a\u{0300}'` had the `'a'` moved forward within a segment.  After pausing and thinking through it, I know that's not actually what's happening... but I had to pause and think through it, and I've been part of related discussions.  Fresh readers may struggle more without a bit of segment-parsing assistance.

Using different `\u` codepoints after the `'a'` would likely help as well.

```suggestion
- `nfdMarkers('e\u{0300}' + Marker('marker1') + '\u{0320}' + 'a\u{0300}' + Marker('marker2') + '\u{0320}')`
- Returns: `'e' + Marker('marker1') + '\u{0320}\u{0300}' + 'a' + Marker('marker2') + '\u{0320}\u{0300}'`
```

Author: > It may be worth splitting the input and output strings to make the "normalization-safe segment" boundaries easier to parse.

But the point is that they aren't split going in, and this function splits them for processing.

This is "example 3" above in the spec text. The purpose of this content here is to show the function call usage.  How about if I just say that this is "example 3" and make sure that the spec is clear about how things work?  I don't think the spec should be repeated in the pseudocode.

> Using different \u codepoints after the 'a' would likely help as well.

That would not show the need for the function.  If the glue characters were distinct, there would be no need for segmentation- you could run the `nfdMarkersSegment()` function on the entire string.

Reviewer: > Since you use '\u{0300}' and '\u{0320}' following both the e and the a, it's easy to confuse what's happening in the center part.

I agree with the comment. Don't use duplicate characters in the example when the positions may change.

```js
/**
 * Normalize a string-with-markers into NFD.
 * @param input string with markers as out-of-band
 * @returns normalized output as a string with markers
 */
export function nfdMarkers(input /* string with markers */) {
    // to accumulate output text
    let output = "";
    // remove all markers
    let noMarkers = removeMarkers(input);
    // NFD the no-marker text.
    let noMarkersNfd = normalizeNFD(noMarkers);

    // Two quick checks.
    if (noMarkers === input) {
        // Heuristic: if there were no markers we can safely return noMarkersNFD
        return noMarkersNFD;
    } else if (noMarkersNFD === noMarkers) {
        // Heuristic: if normalization made no change, return the input string: already NFD
        return input;
    }

    let segmentStart = 0;
    let segmentEnd = 0;

    // look for normalization-safe segments
    // 'i' = iterate by codepoints
    do {
        const haveMarker = markerAt(i); // true if there is a marker here
        if (i === input.end) {

>             segmentEnd = i; // end of input - end of segmetn

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            segmentEnd = i; // end of input - end of segment
```

        return noMarkersNfd;
    } else if(noMarkersNfd == noMarkers) {
        // no change in this segment
        return input;
    } else {
        return addBackMarkers(noMarkersNfd, markerMap);
    }
}

// represents a removed marker, to be re-added
interface MarkerEntry {
    glue: string;      // 'glue' character
    marker: Marker;  // which marker
    processed: boolean = false; // track whether this was processed or not
    eot: boolean = false; // track whether end of text or not
}

/** parse the string for markers */
function parseMarkers(s: string): MarkerEntry[] {
    // Note: parseMarkers() and removeMarkers() (not shown) could be the same function.
    // queue of markers found
    let lastMarkers: Marker[] = [];
    // return value
    let outputMap: MarkerEntry[] = [];

    // iterate string by codepoints
    for (i = s.begin; i< s.end;) {
        if (markerAt(i)) {
            // found a marker - add it to the list
            lastMarkers.add(markerAt(i));
            i += /* marker length */;
        } else {
            // From 'i' find the glue char for all markers found so far
            // (in order)
            // use first char of decomposed string

>             const glue = normalizeNFD(i).codePointAt(0);
>             for (m of markers) {
>                 map.add({marker: m, glue: glue});
>             }
>             markers.clear();

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            const glue = normalizeNFD(i).codePointAt(0);
            for (m of lastMarkers) {
                outputMap.add({marker: m, glue: glue});
            }
            lastMarkers.clear();
```

            i++; // move to next codepoint
        }
    }

>     // ran out of codepoints.
>     // any remaining markers are EOT
>     for (m of markers) {
>         map.add({marker: m, eot: true});
>     }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // ran out of codepoints.
    // any remaining markers are EOT
    for (m of lastMarkers) {
        outputMap.add({marker: m, eot: true});
    } 
```

}

/**
 * re-add markers to input. Mutates markerMap.
 * @param input normalized string to re-add markers
 * @param markerMap list of glued markers. will be mutated
 */
function addBackMarkers(input : string, map: MarkerEntry[]) : stringWithMarkers {
    // quick check
    if(map.empty()) return input;

    // output string
    let out = '';

    // first, add all of the EOT entries
    while (!map.empty() && map[map.length - 1].eot) {
        const m = map.popEnd(); // remove the last entry
        out = m.marker + out; // prepend the marker
    }

    // now, process input codepoints from end to beginning
    for (i=input.end;i>=input.begin;i--) {
        // 0. prepend this codepoint
        out = i + out;

        // 1. any markers at the end of list which match get added
        while (!map.empty() && map[map.length - 1].glue == i) {
            // remove last entry, so we don't have to process it any more.
            const m = map.popEnd();
            if (m.processed == false) {
                out = m.marker + out; // prepend marker
            } // else we already processed it

>         }

Reviewer 4: I don't think this is entirely correct.

Also, I would like to say that use of `map` for a parameter of an array / list type has some unwanted implications that affects readability - I thought it was an actual [`Map` type](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Map) for a while when reviewing this section.
- Or a [Java map](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Map.html)
- Or a [C++ map](https://cplusplus.com/reference/map/map/)
- ... you get the idea.

----

Suppose the following segment: `e` `\u{0320}` `\m{1}` `\u{0300}` `\u{0300}`
- Note:  marker in front of a non-unique member of the segment.

Based on the outer for-loop's iteration order and the inner while loop ("1."), wouldn't we get the following output?
- `e` `\u{0320}` `\u{0300}` `\m{1}` `\u{0300}`

My understanding is that this would be an incorrect result according to the spec, as the `\m{1}` should remain "attached" to the first `\u{0300}`.

Introducing something of a `.glueOrdinal` property to handle duplicated codepoints within the same segment and managing that properly would likely be sufficient... though I understand it would likely only exist to handle edge cases like this one.  This idea should viable with the current strategy:  on observing an instance of `.glue`, pre-decrement `.glueOrdinal` and then check if the resulting value matches zero.  If so, pop and insert it; if not, wait for the next `.glue` instance and break the `while` loop.

Author: @jahorton It's actually an array. I'll update the name.

Author: @jahorton 

> Suppose the following segment: `e \u{0320} \m{1} \u{0300} \u{0300}`
> .. wouldn't we get the following output?
>
> e \u{0320} \u{0300} \m{1} \u{0300}
>
> My understanding is that this would be an incorrect result according to the spec, as the \m{1} should remain "attached" to the first \u{0300}.

Good point. Thanks.

>         // 2. look for any out of order markers, not right at the end

Reviewer 4: I don't understand the purpose of this section, despite the comment.  Could you give an example case where we'd need this extra section?  I thought that part of the point of the `parseMarkers` section was that they'd always be in order.  If so, this section shouldn't be needed.

Author: This code looks for the glue characters and inserts the markers.

parseMarkers was called before normalization. 

At this line of code, the glue characters were out of order because of normalization. See the examples, U+0065 U+0302 U+0320 is now U+0065 **U+0320** U+0302.

We first try them in order, because that's the common case. But if the glue characters were rearranged, then look for them out of order.

Reviewer 4: Oh, right.  🤦 That _would_ be a major reason we're doing this.  

Guess I neglected that during the review in the midst of all the other moving parts.

And that'd be why the loop doesn't get broken.  Okay, that was the piece I was missing; the section makes total sense now.  (Even if the pseudocode's been removed for now.

        for (let m2 = map.length - 2; m2 >= 0; m2 --) {
            const m = map[m2]; // peek at end of list

>             if (m.glue == i && !m.processed) {

Reviewer 4: If using the `.glueOrdinal` idea, and if we actually _do_ need the "out of order" section, we'd need its check here too.  Should the check here fail, further iteration of this loop should be terminated.

_Attribute:_ `normalization="disabled"`

> The presence of this attrinbute indicates that normalization will not be applied to input text, matching, or output.
> See [Normalization](#normalization) for additional details.
>

> > **Note**: while this attribute is allowed by the specification, it should be used with caution, and keyboards with `normalization="disabled"` would not be accepted into the ClDR repository.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> **Note**: while this attribute is allowed by the specification, it should be used with caution, and keyboards with `normalization="disabled"` would not be accepted into the CLDR repository.
```

Though the idea of removing this bit for now, until a proper discussion happens later, was floated in today's meeting.

_Attribute:_ `normalization="disabled"`

> > The presence of this attrinbute indicates that normalization will not be applied to input text, matching, or output.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> The presence of this attribute indicates that normalization will not be applied to input text, matching, or output.
```

</transformGroup>
```

#### Reorder and Markers

> The reorders do not themselves interact with markers, that is, markers may not be matched by a `reorder` element. However, if a character preceded by one or more markers is reordered due to a `reorder` element, those markers will also move with the characters as with the `transform` elements.

Reviewer: "The reorders" sounds strange. Do you mean the processing according to reorder elements? Maybe "reorder processing" would be clearer, if that is what you mean

</transformGroup>
```

#### Reorder and Markers

Markers are not matched by `reorder` elements. However, if a character preceded by one or more markers is reordered due to a `reorder` element, those markers will be reordered with the characters, maintaining the same relative order.  This is a similar process to the algorithm used to normalize strings processed by `transform` elements.

> Keyboard implementations must process reorders using the following algorithm.

Reviewer: You fixed 'reorders' in one place but not others.

Author: done
